---
title: How China Fixed State-Owned Enterprises and Undercut liberalized trade in the Process
date: 2022-03-22 18:47:00
categories: [UC Berkeley]
tags: [Economics, Capitalism, Portfolio]
---
# The Story of ARM China
In 2020, ARM Limited—a semiconductor intellectual property (IP) firm—fired Allen Wu from his position as CEO of ARM China—or tried to. ARM Limited and 7 of 8 members of the ARM China board voted to fire Allen Wu, the CEO of ARM China—but they couldn’t. Since Allen Wu possessed the company stamp (or chop), the boards of ARM Limited and ARM China could not complete the documents that would allow them to  fire Allen Wu officially (Chase 2022). Wu took this a step further, suing himself in court to make his firing illegal (Patel 2021), and, in 2021, Wu created a new company, claiming ARM CPU intellectual property and divesting himself (and the new company) of any responsibility to ARM or ARM China.

This illustrates a peculiar problem for foreign direct investment (FDI) in China. China tacitly encourages close partnerships between politicians and the private sector, advantaging Chinese companies in the process. While recent changes in Chinese policy have created a Pre-Entry National Treatment where “...treatment available to foreign investors at market access stage is no less favorable than that available to domestic investors” (Chen 2021), restrictions in the technology sector on foreign investment remain highly limiting. China’s partnership between politicians and private corporations addressed the bureaucratic apathy characteristic of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) but created problems for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the process.

State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) were used in developing countries to give new governments direct control, often following decolonization (Prado and Trebilcock, 2021). They provided a new government a means to directly control inflation and implement income redistribution. However, SOEs have received criticism for corruption and politically motivated appointments, lack of incentives to improve the SOE and exercise oversight, and a trend toward monopolization (Prado and Trebilcock, 2021; Weiner 2015). All these issues have been solved by China—or are intended features.
 

# How China Solved SOEs
SOEs frequently suffer from corruption and politically motivated appointments due to a lack of incentives present in private enterprise. Unlike private enterprises, where the owners and stakeholders (theoretically) seek to place competent employees and reduce embezzlement to maximize company profits and their own income, SOEs have no such incentives. According to Prado and Trebilcock, efficient management suffers because “...managerial appointments are often made based on politics rather than merit, and because SOEs are not subject to traditional market risks such as takeovers or bankruptcy” (Prado and Trebilcock, 2021). This creates problems in monitoring operations and optimizing the performance of employees. Since there are no investors motivated by profit, there is no hierarchical system whose purpose is to improve profit and so enforce adequate performance among employees. The managers will be paid the same regardless of how well the employees and the SOE operate. No oversight is incentivized. Latin America has mitigated these issues using independent review boards issues and reducing SOE responsibilities to single government entities (Prado and Trebilcock, 2021). China takes a different approach.

For-profit SOEs and partnerships between politicians and private enterprises have allowed China to grease the bureaucratic wheels creating more efficient bureaucratic processes. In her 2021 article “The Robber Barons of Beijing,” Yuen Yuen Ang discusses four types of corruption and attributes China’s bureaucratic success to a specific type: Access Money. Access Money refers to a private enterprise offering “high-stakes rewards to powerful officials in exchange not just for speed but also for access to exclusive, lucrative privileges, including cheap credit, land grants, monopoly rights, procurement contracts, tax breaks, and the like.”  Access Money is important because it provides the incentives absent in traditional SOEs. Politicians are rewarded—or rather bribed—for favors done for private enterprises encouraging them to monitor and seek advantageous opportunities within various markets. Yuen Yuen Ang notes that “...because politicians personally benefit from the investment they bring into their jurisdictions, they are driven to borrow and build feverishly…”. These incentives speed up bureaucratic processes but may lead to unstable development in the process. Rather than corruption being an obstacle for SOEs in China, Yuen Yuen Ang argues that corruption addresses the lack of incentives in SOEs. Politicians are incentivized by bribes to operate effectively and exercise oversight over other bureaucrats when their potential for financial gain is on the line. An obvious concern is that this would lead to monopolies as a leading corporation has a greater ability to bribe officials.

In fact, SOEs do lead to the creation of monopolies. Without competition, enterprises have no reason to innovate, they can raise prices with impunity, and they can lower wages since there will be nowhere else for people working in that sector to go. Prado and Trebilcock state that “...government ownership tends to encourage monopoly.” (Prado and Trebilcock, 2021) A good example is China which, until recently, had very few antitrust laws. Why is innovation not a problem for Chinese monopolies when monopolies are supposed to be the death of competition and thereby innovation?

In traditional free market economics, competition comes from companies competing for consumer money. Instead of domestic companies competing for consumers, China competes with other nations by proxy through their corporations. Since China’s politicians are closely tied to their industry, Chinese politicians invested in increasing China’s relative power have the leverage to create incentives for Chinese companies to innovate, for example, incentivizing Huawei to compete with Google. Not only is this common, this is an effective driver of innovation. The creation of the iPhone, Apple’s most lucrative and widely known product, was the result of nation-based competition rather than consumer-based competition. The iPhone wasn’t innovative; Apple “...mastered designing and engineering technologies that were first developed and funded by the U.S.A government and military.” (Mazzucato, 2013) Political and military-industrial competition between the U.S.A and USSR through close relations between the government and private industry. More recently, conflicts between the U.S.A and less powerful nations like Afghanistan and Iran have served a similar purpose of funneling money into the military-industrial complex. Similarly, Chinese companies are incentivized because of their close ties with politicians. Unlike most SOEs, Chinese SOEs have a more direct relationship with the Chinese government and so have immense governmental support in competing directly with international competitors.
  

# Liberalized Trade is Incompatible with the Chinese Model
Chinese SOEs and their approach to public and private industry relationships are incompatible with liberalized trade. Central to liberalized trade is low regulation; companies are expected to compete on an even playing field to minimize costs for the consumer and maximize innovation. The Chinese model is particularly suited towards taking advantage of market imbalances. Since SOEs are state owned, they are explicitly regulated by China whose agenda is justifiably biased towards Chinese consumers. A good example of how starkly different China’s approach to industry is from the U.S.A model is provided by a comparison of the value of SOEs versus privately owned corporations in China and the U.S.A. According to the OECD Dataset on the Size and Composition of National State-Owned Enterprise Sectors in 2012, U.S.A SOEs were worth a little over 54 billion USD while the total value of the top 500 U.S.A companies was a little over 13 trillion USD (Total Market Value of U.S. Stock Market, 2022). Even if these SOEs were included in the top 500 U.S.A companies, they would make up less than half a percent of the total value of those top 500 U.S.A companies. By comparison, Chinese SOEs make up more than 60% of CSI300—an index fund which replicates the top 300 Chinese stocks traded on the Shanghai stock exchange. Assuming the proportion of SOEs to be similarly distributed depending on the country implies China’s SOEs have a staggeringly high percentage of the market share at 60% compared to the U.S.A's SOEs which—at a generous estimate—hold less than 1% of the value. The Chinese government has far more control over Chinese-based industry than the U.S.A over U.S.A-based industry.

Another example of how strictly China controls industry is the difference in foreign direct investment (FDI) policy between the U.S.A and China. This difference is significant because the public-private partnerships in China lead to unequal FDI policies. In China, a Negative List refers to sectors in which FDI is restricted or prohibited (Chen, 2021). As of 2020 there were two Negative Lists; one from the National Development and Reform Commission and a second from the Ministry of Commerce (Chen, 2021. These Negative Lists restrict a number of different industries. Foreign investors interested in buying stock in telecommunications industries cannot exceed 50% stock ownership collectively (Chen, 2021). Additionally, news stock is entirely off-limits to foreign investors. By contrast, in the U.S.A the “...foreign investor is permitted and treated based on conditions not less favorable than those that apply to domestic investors in similar circumstances, excluding ownership of land, which is regulated by a special law.” (The Foreign Investments Act, SICE) The only U.S.A restriction on FDI is on land ownership unlike China which protects domestic industries in multiple sectors, such as telecommunications; a famous beneficiary of which is Huawei. China has quite a lot of regulation while liberalized trade requires very limited regulation.

The story of ARM China and Allen Wu illustrates how risky FDI in China can be for foreign investors. Allen Wu refused the firing decision from both ARM Limited and Chinese board members and threatened to nationalize ARM China, effectively “capturing” a major component of a critical industry for China. The 49% stake that SoftBank held in ARM China was at risk in a manner entirely legal in China. This is a sobering story for anyone interested in trading or FDI with China. Foreign investors cannot rely on their investments being secure when there is potential for them to be nationalized. This damages liberalized trade since companies cannot compete on even footing in China when their assets are at risk of seizure. This is why the Foreign Investments Act in the U.S.A guarantees full security and impartial treatment of all investments. The U.S.A is more committed to privatized enterprise—and so liberalized trade—than China where foreign companies are handicapped by Chinese foreign investment policy.
  
  
# Is China Unjustified in its Approach to IP Laws?
China has frequently come under fire for its trade practices. Their use of  “...opaque subsidy policies, currency manipulations, or coerced transfer of IP as a condition of approval of foreign direct investment…” (Prado and Trebilcock, 2022) has led to many calls to the WTO from countries including the U.S.A to enforce compliance with fair trade policies. The theft of IP by China and other developing countries is not wholly unjustified, however. The Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) Agreement has been criticized for restricting access to IP related to life-saving medicines and other things (Prado and Trebilcock, 2022). Noting that U.S.A and EU pharmaceutical companies, for example, are frequently accused of profiteering at the expense of consumers (Tyler et al, 2022), disregarding IP laws to produce life-saving medicine may be considered justifiable. China has gone beyond such IP theft, however, and cannot expect other countries to respect its IP copyrights until China responds in kind. Overall, IP laws need to be less restrictive—especially in the case of medicine—while also having better methods of enforcing copyright laws. China’s antagonistic approach to trade is understandable in the case of medicine IP, but nationalism and public-private relationships is incompatible with liberalized trade.

Close partnerships between the government and the private sector allowed China to escape many of the traps of SOEs and thrive, but these damage international trade relations and FDI in the process. The Chinese model is a fascinating variant of nationalized corporations. Codified methods for rewarding bureaucrats for expedient and thoughtful work could prevent Access Money from slipping into more destructive forms of corruption. The Chinese model may still be unsuccessful; according to Yuen Yuen Ang “...the Chinese economy is not just a high-growth economy but also a high-risk and out-of-balance economy.” (Yuen Yuen Ang, 2021) Perhaps all this spectacular growth will only lead to a spectacular fall. Yuen Yuen Ang also notes that the two countries with the highest amount of “Access Money” are the U.S.A. and China. While in China the corporations predominantly follow the whims of the government the opposite may be true in the U.S.A. Ultimately this economic strategy—similar in many ways to that of the U.S.A.—is incompatible with democracy since by design it encourages fast-paced decision-making with little or no opportunity for public input and decidedly non-democratic lack of transparency.
  

--------------  

Chase, Adam, director. Why You Can’t Be Fired in China If You Have This Stamp. YouTube, 14 Apr. 2022, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fKcywQQKqqg. Accessed 10 May 2022. 

Chen, Audrey. “Doing Business in China: Overview - Practical Law.” Thomson Reuters Practical Law, 1 Aug. 2021, https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/8-501-1377?contextData=(sc.Default)

Hissey, Ian. “Investing in Chinese State-Owned Enterprises.” FactSet Insight - Commentary and Research from Our Desk to Yours, FactSet, 17 Dec. 2019, https://insight.factset.com/investing-in-chinese-state-owned-enterprises

Mazzucato, Mariana. The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths. Penguin Books, 2013. 

“OECD Dataset on the Size and Composition of National State-Owned Enterprise Sectors.” 2012. https://www.oecd.org/corporate/oecd-dataset-size-composition-soe-sectors.htm

Patel, Dylan. “The Semiconductor Heist of the Century: Arm China Has Gone Completely Rogue, Operating as an Independent Company with Inhouse IP/R&amp;D.” The Semiconductor Heist Of The Century | Arm China Has Gone Completely Rogue, Operating As An Independent Company With Inhouse IP/R&amp;D, SemiAnalysis, 27 Aug. 2021, https://semianalysis.substack.com/p/the-semiconductor-heist-of-the-century?s=r. 

Prado, Mariana Mota, and Michael J. Trebilcock. Advanced Introduction to Law and Development. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021.

“The Foreign Investments Act.” SICE, http://www.sice.oas.org/investment/natleg/us/usfiac.asp#:~:text=The%20foreign%20investor%20is%20permitted,impartial%20treatment%2C%20and%20full%20security

“Total Market Value of U.S. Stock Market.” Siblis Research, 9 May 2022, https://siblisresearch.com/data/us-stock-market-value/

Tyler Schneider, Tara Gomes, Kaleen N. Hayes, Katie J. Suda, Mina Tadrous,
Comparisons of Insulin Spending and Price Between Canada and the United States, Mayo Clinic Proceedings, Volume 97, Issue 3, 2022, Pages 573-578, ISSN 0025-6196, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2021.11.028.

Weiner, Fanny, et al. “4 Key Challenges for Reforming State-Owned Enterprises: Lessons from Latin America.” World Bank Blogs, World Bank, 8 Sept. 2015, https://blogs.worldbank.org/governance/4-key-challenges-reforming-state-owned-enterprises-lessons-latin-america

Yuen Yuen, Ang. “The Robber Barons of Beijing.” Can China Keep Rising?, 4th ed., vol. 100, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, NY, 2021, pp. 30–39. Foreign Affairs. https://macua.blogs.com/files/foreign-affairs_july-august-2021.pdf


